---
layout: post
title: "v2.0.0-rc1 Release Notes"
---

This release is fully backwards-incompatible with 1.x because there's been a
massive overhaul of its internals. The internals are now much easier to work
with and I expect that there will be a lower threshold to contribute.

The public API of v2.0 is simpler. For example, have a look at the
[README](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/blob/v2.0.0.rc.1/README.md) as an
example of the new API.

I recommend you start using the new version today! It's well worth the time
investment; this is the version that albacore is going forward with.

## Changes: Improvements

The new version is built around the fact that NuGet has become the de-facto
standard of managing your .Net dependencies. It will run NuGet.exe transparently
on both Windows and Mono. We develop both on Mac and on Windows at Intelliplan,
so the code has been tested for over half a year already.

One improvement that you will experience, switching to the new version, is how
easy it becomes to bootstrap builds of nugets; all you have to do is to give an
enumerable of file paths to the #files property:

``` ruby
nugets_pack :nugets => ['build/pkg', :versioning, :build] do |p|
  # FileList looks at the file system, returning an enumerable:
  p.files   = FileList['src/**/*.{csproj,fsproj,nuspec}'].
    exclude(/Tests/)
  p.out     = 'build/pkg'
  p.exe     = 'buildsupport/NuGet.exe'
  p.with_metadata do |m|
    m.description = 'A cool nuget'
    m.authors = 'Henrik'
    m.version = ENV['NUGET_VERSION']
  end
end
```

Given that you have the normal workflow of adding a new project to your `src`
folder and inside the `sln` that you work with, that project will then be made a
nuget of. Zero friction. Attaching the teamcity extension will ensure that your
new nuget is recognized by TeamCity, too, meaning that you'll have a
bootstrapped NuGet server very very quickly: 
`require 'albacore/ext/teamcity'`.

Other improvements include unified logging and a better object model behind the
scenes. Also, everything is unit-tested, at 322 test cases at the moment, and
counting.

Many improvements have been made to the nuget handling, to make it easier. In
the end, creating nugets should be as easy as writing `Gem::Tasks.new` or in
this case `NuGet::Tasks.new`, and then `rake release` when you want to commit,
tag and push a new nuget to NuGet.org. Albacore should support both the open
source workflow and the proprietary-code workflow.

Albacore has now got a very simple publish-subscribe pattern
[implemented](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/blob/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/albacore_module.rb#L43)
which is being used to publish when artifacts are created, at the moment, but
can publish any sort of event.

More changes and improvements in list-form

 - All public APIs are now documented, so [go read the
   code!](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/tree/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore).
 - The very few actual task-types now
   [reside](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/tree/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/task_types)
   in their own folder. The idea is to have more integrations done over the
   pub-sub facility as well as
[extensions](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/tree/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/ext).
 - Useful tools that you run one-off are in
   [tools](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/tree/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/tools),
   and will be possible to use in an `albacore` binary a Minor release, or two,
   from now.
 - It is now
   [possible](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/blob/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/application.rb#L16)
   to
   [control](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/blob/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/albacore_module.rb#L17)
   output much more closely, making it easier to have albacore be as transparent
   as possible in your build process.
 - When you want to
   [log](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/blob/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/logging.rb)
   from your own Rakefile you can now do things like:

``` ruby
require 'albacore'
require 'albacore/logging'

include ::Albacore::Logging

task :my_task do
  trace { "hello world" }
  system 'echo', 'goodbye'
end
```

 - Path handling is always a mess when building .Net/Mono applications cross
    platform; use
   [Paths](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/blob/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/paths.rb)
   for great good.
 - If you need a class to manipulate xxproj-files with, have a loop at the
   [Project](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/blob/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/project.rb)
   model.
 - If you find yourself writing something to wrap an invocation of an
   executable, as a class, you can write something like this:

``` ruby
require 'set'
require 'albacore/cross_platform_cmd'

class TxSrv
  include ::Albacore::CrossPlatformCmd # includes e.g. #system, #mono_command
  def initialize
    @parameters = []
    @executable = 'buildsupport/TransactionServer_IntegrationTests.exe'
    # makes sure mono is there if running on linux:
    mono_command
  end
  def execute
    system @executable, *(@parameters.to_a)
  end
end

class RunTests
  include ::Albacore::CrossPlatformCmd # includes e.g. #system, #mono_command
  def execute
    exe =
FileList['src/packages/machine.specifications.*/tools/mspec.clr4.exe'].first
    dll = 'src/ProjA/bin/Debug/ProjA.dll'
    system exe, dll
  end
end

task :it_tests do
  t = Thread.new do
    TxSrv.new.execute
  end
  # run tests here
  RunTests.new.execute
ensure
  t.kill
end
```

As you can see, there have been many changes and improvements aiming to make
albacore a much nicer library to include whenever you have a .Net project that
needs building and packaging.

### Other changes, contrasted with `master` branch

The improvements aside, there are structural changes to the rewrite, too:

 - No longer do we have a custom "task" - that is a custom DSL method, per
   'application', unless that application really supports CLR development and is
   needed 'normally'. Instead we have "task types"; these show up in the DSL,
   that is they can be used in the
[Rakefile](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/blob/v2.0.0.rc.1/lib/albacore/dsl.rb).
 - All task-types are now deferred until they are required to execute. Nothing
   but file globs and similar things run until the task is required to have
   executed. Previously this has been almost on a per-task basis.
 - The output task hasn't been coded yet because I couldn't understand why a
   simple `Dir.glob( ... ).each { |file| cp file, target }` didn't cut it.
 - It's no longer possible to globally configure albacore with settings, simply
   because the task-types are more powerful this time around.
 - Task-types now do simple assignment to their lambda-parameters, rather than
   method invocations -- except when deviating from the default, in which case
   the deviation is a method call (like `Build::Config.gen_symbols`), or when
   giving parameters that are best represented with a method call, such as
   `NugetsPack::Config.attributes`.

## The road ahead

A little about where Albacore is headed.

### Configuration and VaryByParam

In the [README](https://github.com/Albacore/albacore/tree/v2.0.0.rc.1#ideas) for
this release, I have documented one feature that has been rebuilt by albacore
consumers many times over; building with multiple frameworks -- e.g.
constructing a `build` task-type and having it run once with .Net 3.5 and then a
second time with .Net 4.5, executing the full task-graph every time.

Having a configuration that does 'vary by param' would make this type of
build-per-parameter-combination much easier to perform.

### Representing the tasks as a graph

In v3.0 I want to have refactored `Albacore.create_task` and all task-types in
the DSL to construct an immutable graph of things to build. Only after
constructing the immutable snapshot (specification) does the build commence by
starting to call the tasks' #execute.

This would make the build much more declarative and make interop with project
like [repobuild](https://github.com/chrisvana/repobuild) easier to program.

Besides, it would allow a much higher degree of modification by extensions, by
letting each task (created through a task-type-method in the DSL) carry with it
its `Config` and description and list of dependencies. This graph of tasks could
then be fed through a pipeline where each extension can inspect and possible
output a new/changed graph, should it want. Since the graph is directed,
acyclic, the vary-by-param task could then be implemented simply as a task that
takes its child trees (child tasks) and duplicates them, having all child tasks
take properties of the `Config` of the Vary-By-Param task as
*DependentVariables*.

### Improving deployment

In v3.0 I want to have a deployment example for
[Linux](http://linux.die.net/man/8/yum) and
[mono](http://fsharp.org/use/linux/) with proper versioning and artifact
management. Simply put; everyone needs to deploy their systems, and if the build
system can help you or recommend you how to do that, it's a gain. Work items
such as [#54](https://github.com/jordansissel/fpm/issues/54) come to mind,
something that should dovetail nicely with a v3.0 release of albacore.

### Improving testing

For .Net developers in general, starved half to death of good testing tools
(albeit excellent tooling for unit-tests in particular, not much after that),
having a build system that makes it easier to test code, could be invaluable.
Just as nugets_pack allows you to bootstrap your nugets very quickly,
integration with for example
[tsung](http://tsung.erlang-projects.org/user_manual/index.html) or
[suave](http://suave.io/) would make it much easier to test your web code.

The aim of albacore, hence, isn't to force these tools on you, but rather to
provide a runtime that can be used on a CI-server that keep the tools in check,
configuring their runs, running and monitoring the processes and then collecting
their results.

## Conclusion

I'm really happy to have gotten this release out of the door, so test it. Around
new-year I plan on doing the RTM v2.0 release unless something comes up.

Happy coding!
Henrik Feldt
